Detailed events guide (#588)
casper-network/docs: source/docs/casper/dapp-dev-guide/building-dapps/monitoring-events.md

# Monitoring and Consuming Events

> Casper platform uses event streaming to notify state changes in smart contracts and nodes. A node on a Casper network streams events through the SSE (Server Sent Event) server. Events are emitted by the event stream servers of the Casper network nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Casper platform uses event streaming to notify state changes in smart contracts and nodes. A node on a Casper network streams events through the SSE (Server Sent Event) server. Events are emitted by the event stream servers of the Casper network nodes. 
```
```suggestion
Casper platform uses event streaming to notify state changes in smart contracts and nodes. A node on a Casper network streams events through the SSE (Server Sent Event) server.
```

## Event Types

> There are three types of events in our platform categorized based on the emitting endpoint of the nodes. Those are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three types of event streams in our platform categorized based on the emitting endpoint of the nodes. Those are:
```

> There are three types of events in our platform categorized based on the emitting endpoint of the nodes. Those are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three types of event streams in our platform categorized by the emitting endpoint of the nodes. Those are:
```

**Deploy events**

> These are associated with Deploys on a node. Currently, we are handling only `DeployAccepted` event. Refer to the [Deploys](/design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys) section to discover more about Deploys and their life cycles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are associated with Deploys on a node. Currently, only `DeployAccepted` event is emitted . Refer to the [Deploys](/design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys) section to discover more about Deploys and their life cycles.
```

> These are associated with Deploys on a node. Currently, we are handling only `DeployAccepted` event. Refer to the [Deploys](/design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys) section to discover more about Deploys and their life cycles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are associated with Deploys on a node. Currently, only `DeployAccepted` events are emitted. Refer to the [Deploys](/design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys) section to discover more about Deploys and their life cycles.
```

**Finality Signature event**

This event indicates that the final approvals from validators are signed and further alterations to the block will not be allowed. Refer to the [consensus reached](/design/execution-semantics/#consensus-reached) section and [block finality](/glossary/B/#block-finality) 

> section to learn more about finality signature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
section to learn more about finality signatures.
```

**Main events**

All the events other than `DeployAccepted` and `FinalitySignature` fall under this type. Those are ApiVersion, BlockAdded, DeployProcessed, DeployExpired, Fault, Step, and Shutdown events.

### How to monitor the event stream?
You can start watching the event stream details using a simple Curl call as in the below format:

```bash
curl -s http://<HOST:PORT>/events/<ENDPOINT>
```

- `HOST` - The IP address of a peer on the network

> - `PORT` - The port 9999 (Since we are testing on Mainnet or Testnet)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PORT` - The port 9999 (The default port number for nodes on Mainnet or Testnet)
```

- `ENDPOINT` - The specific endpoint of the node which the event will be emitted

> The default configuration of the Casper node provides event streaming via the port specified as the `event_stream_server.address` in the node's *config.toml*, which is by default `9999` for nodes on [Testnet](https://testnet.cspr.live/tools/peers) and [Mainnet](https://cspr.live/tools/peers). 

Reviewer: Lets move this line to the top of the file please

## Monitoring DeployAccepted Event

You can start watching the event stream for the `DeployAccepted` event or any other events being emitted on this endpoint using the following command. Replace the `HOST` field with the `peer IP address`.

```bash
curl -s http://<HOST>:9999/events/deploys
```
**DeployAccepted event details**

The URL to consume the Deploy-related events is `http://<HOST>:9999/events/deploys`.

> The event stream server of the node emits this event when a Deploy has been received by the node. At this point, it needs to pass a set of validity checks. Refer to the [Deploy gossiped](/design/execution-semantics/#deploy-gossiped) step in the Deploy lifecycle to learn more about this event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The event stream server of the node emits this event when a Deploy has been received by the node. 
```
```suggestion
The event stream server of the node emits this event when a Deploy has been received by the node.
```

        "ttl":"30m",
        "gas_price":1,
        "body_hash":"eb53a7db7c29f9b6101797167302e5977dbe53cb5ee9b9ae961e3418d95aeb1c",
        "dependencies":[],
        "chain_name":"casper-net-1"
        },
      "payment":
        {"ModuleBytes":
          {"module_bytes":"",
          "args":[["amount",{"cl_type":"U512","bytes":"0400f90295","parsed":"2500000000"}]]
          }
        },
      "session":
        {"Transfer":
          {
            "args":[["amount",{"cl_type":"U512","bytes":"0400f90295","parsed":"2500000000"}],
                ["target",{"cl_type":{"ByteArray":32},"bytes":"b33d857b45a2280d846c50cb3ad76850e2125012c2ba6a814957f48d68052334","parsed":"b33d857b45a2280d846c50cb3ad76850e2125012c2ba6a814957f48d68052334"}],
                ["id",{"cl_type":{"Option":"U64"},"bytes":"010100000000000000","parsed":1}]]
          }
        },
      "approvals":
        [{"signer":"01e35e1904034db6c0bb48c6d88826a2bcf27f29f67a13d844b82aab04614f83f4","signature":"0105aa48ff49e0202d0b4c17ca449ccd6ba30ae80fed5e60503eb34eab7a8aab11893502b7856946cdafcc1966dcbe656b3cab06f0396829484edd14b6ffb94f08"}
        ]
    } 
}
id:506

```
</details>

> You can find the definitions of the terms in the above `DeployAccepted` JSON representation by referring to the following links:

Reviewer: Provide a link to Deploy serialization here

- [Deploy](/design/serialization-standard/#serialization-standard-deploy) - Contains the serialization details of a Deploy with other related details like Deploy- Hash, Deploy-Header, Payment and Session, Approval.

> - [Serialization Standard](/design/serialization-standard/) - Contains the details on required custom serializations.

Reviewer: Since we link to the deploy serialization, this line in not needed

## Monitoring FinalitySignature Event

You can start watching the event stream for the `FinalitySignature` event or any other events being emitted on this endpoint using the following command. Replace the `HOST` field with the `peer IP address`.

```bash
curl -s http://<HOST>:9999/events/sigs
```
**FinalitySignatures event details**

The URL to consume the `FinalitySignature` event is `http://<HOST>:9999/events/sigs`.

> The `FinalitySignature` event is emitted,  whenever a new [finality](/glossary/B/#block-finality) signature is received.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `FinalitySignature` event is emitted whenever a new [finality](/glossary/B/#block-finality) signature is received.
```

The following example contains the JSON representation of the `FinalitySignature` event structure.

<details>
<summary>Expand the below section to view the FinalitySignature event details:</summary>

```bash
data:
 {
   "FinalitySignature":
    {
     "block_hash":"abbcdc782a18a9ba31826b07c838a69a6b790c8b36a0fd5f0818f757834d82f5",
     "era_id":11,
     "signature":"01d45c16e488c3e16bb1e1134f9a92fb42492498ab2233a643a159281ea8a2a497edd19b6ae56f70c32c12f0341a9ded719033285db17c614337e363fdd8e41f05",
     "public_key":"01601bda04ea125e2ca1881e817c46403b32862eb053370e0b93adad220378578a"
     }
 }
id:696
```
</details>

Refer to the following definitions of the JSON representation terms:
- [block_hash](/design/serialization-standard/#block-hash) - A cryptographic hash that is used to identify a Block.
- [era_id](/design/serialization-standard/#eraid) - The period of time used to specify when specific events in a blockchain network occur.

> - [signature](/design/serialization-standard/#signature) - A serialized bte representation of a cryptographic signature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [signature](/design/serialization-standard/#signature) - A serialized byte representation of a cryptographic signature.
```

          "header":
           {
            "parent_hash":"997d2f23c0a70ecca18043eab2f2f4fdef47fceba96519145b8e5d44609c4f80",
            "state_root_hash":"48ec6b9cc41ec36f7424b3b1d24fcc4dfe96d7e01e2196c9f45879a1a8d4b996",
            "body_hash":"03a5a5e40042f904fd2f307085c07f9774d17f9ee17fc3ef23ed5485dfff972d",
            "random_bit":true,
            "accumulated_seed":"9200c4ac43deda1dd5a8ca91ec37ce33df0ef06bd82d94314bbb961e9e6501f7",
            "era_end":null,
            "timestamp":"2022-06-22T13:42:37.824Z",
            "era_id":9,
            "height":97,
            "protocol_version":"1.0.0"
           },
          "body":
            {
               "proposer":"01601bda04ea125e2ca1881e817c46403b32862eb053370e0b93adad220378578a",
               "deploy_hashes":[],
               "transfer_hashes":[]
            },
          "proofs":[]
        }
     }
  }
id:594
```
</details>

- [block_hash](/design/serialization-standard/#block-hash) - A cryptographic hash that is used to identify a Block.
- [block](/design/serialization-standard/#serialization-standard-block) - The JSON representation of the Block.

> - Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms in of the event stream output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and the [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms used in the event stream output.
```

              "parsed":"0"
             }
            }
          },
          {"key":"balance-fca9f7cb7cf68cd4fe6969bf089f56341ff5c35dbec649d9353c3989e5a91ade","transform":
            {"AddUInt512":"100000000"
            }
          }
        ]
      },
    "transfers":
     ["transfer-dc0fa2fefc399e2e0b3256d6c3fda78cd459e3f55cd07e7ebad1d785613f6a7c"],
      "cost":"100000000"
    }
   }
  }
}
id:598
```
</details>

- [deploy_hash](/design/serialization-standard/#deploy-hash) - The cryptographic hash of a Deploy.
- [account](/design/serialization-standard/#serialization-standard-account) - A structure that represents a user on a Casper Network.
- [timestamp](/design/serialization-standard/#timestamp) - A timestamp type, representing a concrete moment in time.
- [ttl](/design/serialization-standard/#timediff) - A time difference between two timestamps.
- [dependencies](/design/serialization-standard/#deploy-header) - A list of Deploy hashes. 
- [block_hash](/design/serialization-standard/#block-hash) - A cryptographic hash that is used to identify a Block.
- [execution_result](/design/serialization-standard/#executionresult) - The result of executing a single deploy.

> - Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and the [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms used in the event stream output.

Reviewer: Lets take this line to the top of the document, and then remove all other usages of such lines

> - Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms in of the event stream output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and the [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms used in the event stream output.
```

                  "validator_public_key":"013d3fb7e3ceac62a900d7e868db0a4c3c8bde6dce873c3f06bf50638d91422857",
                  "vesting_schedule":
                   {"initial_release_timestamp_millis":1664475057182,
                   "locked_amounts":null
                   }
                  }
                 },
                 "inactive":false
               }
              }
            },
            {"key":"bid-2cf608f36591a31d31190f87e994c93a60078a401d34bb938f26d407d159ddfa","transform":"Identity"},{"key":"bid-2cf608f36591a31d31190f87e994c93a60078a401d34bb938f26d407d...
```
</details>

- [era_id](/design/serialization-standard/#eraid) - The period of time is used to specify when specific events in a blockchain network will occur.
- [execution_effect](/design/serialization-standard/#executioneffect) - The journal of execution transforms from a single Deploy.
- [operations](/design/serialization-standard/#operation) - Operations performed while executing a deploy.
- [transform](/design/serialization-standard/#transform) - The actual transformation performed while executing a deploy.

> - Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms in of the event stream output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Refer to the [serialization standard](/design/serialization-standard/) page to get details on required custom serializations and the [types](/dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/types_chain/) page to find definitions of the terms used in the event stream output.
```
